so the way we want to create and
maintain change is acknowledge that
discomfort is part of changing it's part
of doing something new it's that
unfamiliar space that my subconscious
likes to avoid
we can even reframe it it's signs that
i'm moving in a direction of difference
how great so don't expect it not to be
there and then we learn to work with it
we integrate it in a sense by making one
small promise and we focus on keeping it
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i am here with somebody
you guys are going to love welcome
nicole lapera to the show thank you so
much for having me tom i am super
excited so you are a trained
psychologist you had a private practice
you're about to become a best-selling
author i'm calling that right now i'm
telling you homie the book how to do the
work is going to smash i am super
excited to talk about this um
i'm really freaked out by how much one's
childhood
impacts them
and i want to start with that so the
book give people the subtitle which i
think is brilliant and is going to
inform exactly what we're going to talk
about in this interview
yeah so the subtitle how to essentially
heal from your past understand your
patterns to create your future and if
i'm honest while you know i trained for
very many years as a clinical
psychologist i know we all like to to
joke about how you know part and parcel
of the whole psychology field we like to
think about our past and to wonder how
it informs our present if i'm honest
though tom
i didn't necessarily learn how powerful
our past was in my training i knew it
played a part i knew our past
experiences you know carried with us in
some ways i don't think i understood
though how much so and how much most of
us into adulthood are actually operating
from that past in our in our autopilot
that many of us are living day in and
day out
yeah talk to me about how
these things that happen in our
childhood which don't need to be mega
become the patterns that are our lives
yeah and i saw the same patterning in my
practice so week after week i would
speak to these people who got it who
maybe even saw right the ways that their
past choices or their continued choices
weren't benefiting their future yet week
after week a report of that same habit
that same pattern those that same
stuckness would come in
and what i saw was that in my personal
life too
i struggled to create change just like
my clients and i came to understand why
after of course feeling pretty shameful
pretty broken i think a lot of us do i
would start to hear from my clients
reflections of that disempowerment right
back hopelessness helplessness
a belief that maybe i can't change maybe
this future isn't meant for me
and that was really heartbreaking what i
came to realize
is that the reason why we can't change
is stored in a very powerful part of our
mind called our subconscious so that
upwards of 90 95 of the time that i
think is now the sighted percentage
right of our day that we're not really
paying attention or that we're in
autopilot and what i've realized is in
that autopilot are all of these pathways
right neurons that fire together wire
together if we've practiced pathways
most of us from from childhood and
beyond
we get kind of
these ruts as i call them in our
subconscious so just to contrast from my
conscious mind i have insight i can use
my past to break and inform patterns
that i want to change into my future yet
unbeknownst to most of us we're slipping
back into that autopilot and we're
repeating those old patterns and like i
said for many of us we can feel really
shameful and we can feel it really
broken and wonder why we can't
create these changes or maintain these
changes over time
i want to talk about those ruts so this
is something that i've thought a lot
about in terms of
so i think people will get the neurons
that fire together wire together but
they don't realize
that that can be
um so your your brain is a just caloric
monster so something like 20 of the
calories that you intake go to your
brain your brain equals two and a half
pounds of body weight so i mean it's a
minuscule part of your overall weight
but calorically it's just the cookie
monster
and
what it's
coughing back up into your conscious
mind
isn't just oh i'm putting two thoughts
together
it's
this feeling i'm used to feeling i i
need to
be calorically conservative so i'm going
to whatever i do a lot i'm going to make
that easier to do so feelings that you
feel become easier to feel
and
when i began to understand like how
there was this whole tapestry of
thoughts feelings
actions behaviors that were like a ball
that sort of once i triggered one thing
it was a whole cascade of stuff now what
i love about your book is you're giving
people the tools to unwind that
so
nicole what are those tools
yeah and so i love that you're bringing
up tom the the caloric expenditure i
mean that is one reason there's another
reason why we like to stay in those ruts
or in those patterns because it's
familiar and according to our
subconscious or our evolutionary
instinct to keep ourselves alive that
which is unfamiliar or unpredictable is
uncertain it could be threatening it
could be the thing that ends my system's
life so according to my subconscious we
prefer to avoid that at all cost to keep
ourselves safe so before you know it for
reasons like you're saying to you know
can contain calories we get really good
at certain things at certain thoughts at
certain feelings and they map onto our
familiar physiology so the way out first
and foremost we want to become conscious
we want to see those patterns we want to
see ourself operating as what i call our
habit self we want to learn how to
consciously become an observer of
ourselves for a lot of us that's the
first practice because consciousness is
a practice it's actually firing up our
prefrontal cortex it lives right behind
our our eyes our forehead
and a lot of us aren't used to living
from that space
the easiest access point to our
conscious mind is the present moment
and i like to call i like to reference
using hooks for our attention because a
lot of us we don't we don't flex our
muscle of attention very often at all we
really do have choice we get to decide
what whom or where i'm expending my
attention in any given moment yet for
most of us we're worrying about our past
we're thinking about our future we're
lost in thought we're somewhere else
so for our entry into our conscious mind
we can use the present moment through
one of two hooks
our breath
we're always breathing so if we can
learn how to flex that muscle of
attention and put our full focus onto
the act of our breathing body
we become embodied now i'm in my body
and i'm present to what's in front of me
another hook we can use is our senses
the senses what are we seeing what are
we tasting can we touch something
anything that we can do that senses
based can also be our access point to
conscious awareness the more constantly
present we are the more we have choice
we can begin to create new habits and
patterns in this moment
okay so now let's talk about how people
begin to develop that muscle so you've
talked about setting alarms people can
do that just sort of throughout the day
so it'll ping them and hey what are you
doing right now right so people
begin to train themselves to see how
much time they're spending outside of
that what techniques do we have beyond
that things that are sort of the mental
equivalent of going to the gym
we want to practice it consistently so
starting there this isn't the light
switch i like to say a lot of us you
know maybe discover consciousness we
know it's there maybe we've practiced
once oh i can use my attention i can
come here be present
yet we don't practice consistently
enough
even those of us with a meditation
practice where maybe that's the purpose
of that one or two or five minutes where
i'm sitting my question always remains
what about the rest of your day so if
you had to force rank the tools so is
meditation number one alarms are number
two like what what is the the value
stack of
practicing attention
consciousness is the foundation so
whether or not you can develop your
consciousness muscle by sitting
as a sitting meditation for some of us
beginning if i were to speak from my own
experience tom that was so overwhelming
my body didn't feel safe my thoughts
raced i felt so agitated when i would
try to sit silently that i actually
began to build my consciousness muscle
in real time setting those alarms
because i found that as i went about my
day and my alarm went off and say i was
on a walk being consciously present on
my walk felt a little less intimidating
so i say that to say consciousness is
the practice we can develop it sitting
in quiet turning inward or
in real time and those of us that feel a
bit overwhelmed by the first practice
can do it in any thing we're doing we
can use any context any activity and use
our focus of attention to be conscious
i've heard people say that they get
overwhelmed with meditating but i've
never understood like what what is the
mechanism are they having feelings are
they having thoughts like what what is
the genesis of the overwhelm
well interestingly enough we can't
disconnect those two because thoughts
thought long enough lead to a feeling so
in my opinion and this is part of the
limitation i believe in the old model
when we try to think about cbt change
our thoughts change our bodies change
our actions because those are connected
they're in communication at all times so
before long a thought thought long
enough equals a feeling so for some of
us when we sit it's that monkey mind my
racing thoughts if they're worrisome
thoughts before long i'm in worry now
that's what's spinning people out of
control they're sitting there suddenly
there's no activity to keep them from
just like i have to do this and this and
this
and then they're becoming uncomfortable
some of us our bodies based on past
experiences maybe we're unsafe maybe we
lived in a home where our bodies you
know had uh boundaries where were
crossed our limits or we just didn't
feel safe in our bodies so for some of
us even the action of being present in
our body
equals is an uncomfortable unfamiliar
place to be
okay so if they're living in distraction
they're falling sort of 90
into the default mode network what you
were you know the unconscious mind where
you drive to work you don't remember how
the hell you got there but you got there
um going back to that caloric thing it's
a strategy the brain employs to make
sure that you don't have to think about
everything which would be really
overwhelming
um so if they're living 90 of their life
in the default mode network the default
mode network is worry is the trauma is
thoughts about all that
what is it about sitting so let me
explain why i'm pushing on this so i
take a very different approach in life
than you and so i am very intrigued you
are you are much more
compassionate and gentle like the way
that i speak to myself is very
aggressive
and by being aggressive with myself
meditation ended up working for me and
it was this huge breakthrough but it was
just me saying back to the breath every
time my thoughts wander back to the
breath
and
every time somebody tells me that
meditation doesn't work for them i want
to give them all the opposite advice
but you have touched so many lives so i
want to understand like um
why
should somebody
not force themselves to just sit and
come back to the breath why is that
breaking down somewhere yeah no i
appreciate that and i was giggling when
you were when you're saying that because
you're very similar to my partner um so
it's very interesting to to hear both
sides of that um the reason why we don't
is because of safety i keep going back
very intentionally to that concept
talking about are we safe in our body
are we safe you know to to hear the
thoughts that we're thinking to
experience the underlying sensations or
what we know as emotions are we safe the
reason why i keep focusing on that word
is because our nervous system is always
responding to cues
specifically around safety is my body
safe am i safe in what's happening
remember the predictable they're
familiar equals safe and when we don't
feel safe
for most of us because of very real
events in our life very real experiences
that we had where we fell out of that
regulation where something did overwhelm
our emotional system or maybe even our
physical system in the instances of
actual abuse we don't feel safe
and so to create safety we don't
actually want to dive into the deep end
with you know with no raft on and just
sink or swim
we want to it's called widen the window
we want to very gradually
show ourselves through living the
experience of tolerating discomfort that
we can and to do that we want to widen
it gradually because we have to remember
what created the situation of
dysregulation was overwhelm so jumping
into that deep end creates another
situation of overwhelm we want to
empower ourselves most of us by the time
we reach adulthood feel so disempowered
around our emotions we don't know how to
make sense of them we actually don't
know how to navigate them we don't have
resilience around them what is
resilience the ability to become
dysregulated with a moderate or a mild
amount of stress
and then to come back into safety or
regulation again those of us who don't
feel safe can actually risk that
overwhelm and create another trauma
in a sense for ourselves if we just dive
right in it's really interesting and
knowing your story um
it's
beginning to become clear to me that
there are there is this entire array of
experiences whether that experiences um
stress not feeling safe how you process
trauma whatever um so the fact that you
at one point in your life were just
fainting for no apparent reason with no
real like i can pinpoint what caused
this
that's really interesting talk to me
about how you re-grounded yourself into
your body
so that you could then widen that window
so that you could begin using my own
words become more courageous in the face
of feeling unsafe
that process seems to have had pretty
magical results in your life
and i'd be very curious to hear the
details
by the time i started feeding tom i i
actually i didn't know what was wrong
with me at that point because the
symptoms seemed so physical and seemed
so brain-based i was scared if i was
honest i wouldn't have imagined that
as i dove down and began to peel back
the onion and unpack all of this that
this was related to overwhelming
emotions in childhood that was not my
first path of exploration my first path
of exploration was what is wrong with me
um by that time
just kind of going back on the physical
side of things for me i had headaches my
whole life i had had brain fog or kind
of that that fogginess not really
feeling like my brain was awake all of
the time my whole life out of nowhere as
i entered into my 30s i started to
forget my words mid-sentence memory
issues that i always kind of had now
seemed i seem to have a really hard time
even remembering things that happened
last week for instance and then out of
the blue i started fainting so of course
i was like this must be something wrong
with my brain
what is it and when i dove into research
i then met all of this you know work on
epigenetics and the effect that our
daily choices and or events that happen
to us have on our physical bodies diving
in deeper i really understood my nervous
system and now i understood my fainting
as the the effects of accumulated years
of living in that dysregulated nervous
system so now that i understood what the
cause of it was which goes into my
definition of holistic holistic for me
not only means honoring our mind our
body and our soul the interconnectedness
of our being it also means exploring
what for many of us are the deeper
underlying imbalances that are causing
what we're calling symptoms or even
diagnosis or syndromes right
so now that i understood oh for me
this fainting could be a symptom of
something deeper could be a symptom of
how i'm treating my body
and how dysregulated my nervous system
is
so as i began to dive into this research
i noticed something else how
disconnected i was to my body so once i
build the foundation of consciousness
that we just talked about once i began
to teach myself how to safely inhabit my
body
i began to do some nervous system
regulation techniques and tools the
quickest and easiest one that we all
carry around with us is around breath
work and i started to tune into
how was i breathing just checking in
with my natural flow of breath and i
realized that like many people who
struggle with anxiety i had a really
shallow chest breath
i noticed that sometimes tom when i'm
really stressed out i hold my breath i
actually don't really breathe much at
all
and what i learned is each time i do
both of those things either just breathe
really shallowly or i'm holding my
breath i'm actually contributing to my
anxiety because i'm keeping my nervous
system locked in that fight-or-flight
mode so i learned a new way to breathe i
learned how to use my belly which was
hard at first because all of my posture
was reflective of all of this
constriction and all of this threatening
kind of posture and stance of a lifetime
though once i accessed my belly i
learned that i could learn how to bring
teach my body
can you walk people through how you did
that because
belly breathing diaphragmatic breathing
changed my life so i'd be curious to
know what tools you use for that
yeah so for a lot of us
who struggle with our posture it's hard
um so back straight shoulders back
so i started laying down it was
difficult for me so i would begin my
practice either right before bed or
right when i woke up when i was already
laying and for me it started with just a
small daily promise of five breaths from
my deep belly area for me putting my
hand on my belly physically so i could
feel it
when it would expand and when it would
deflate was really helpful so that was
just a daily promise
every time every morning or right before
bed i would put my hand on my belly and
just practice practice practice but then
like i said i wanted to become more
aware of how i was using my breath all
day long and then building on that
foundation can i harness my breath all
day long when now life's happening and i
have the actual things to be stressed
out about right can i use my breath to
regulate myself in those moments so it
becomes a foundational practice that we
can build upon
nicole i often hear people ask you how
your account grew so quickly and i
listening to you now for as many hours
as i have i'm going to tell you exactly
why you've grown as fast you have
instruction manuals should be written by
people that struggled to build the item
because when you struggle to build it
then you know sort of where the pitfalls
are like the fact that you can explain
to people
the a concept which you bring up a lot
which i think is really brilliant is
these small promises that you make to
yourself and earning credibility with
yourself things that you know if if life
just sort of came easily to you i don't
know that you would have access to
explaining that to people
why small promises why five breaths why
not an hour of uh you know breathing
from your belly what what's the idea
behind those little promises yeah thank
you for for highlighting that and for
for asking this question and it goes
back to that subconscious and its desire
to remain in that familiar so we create
another situation of overwhelm for
ourselves those of us who decide that
starting tomorrow my life will be
different from top to bottom and maybe i
have five new ten new things on my to-do
list i'm diving into that deep end i'm
telling my subconscious that wow my
life's gonna do a you know 360 180 by
tomorrow i'm probably going to overwhelm
so the way we begin to build and create
change what's important is not five new
things for as long as i can white
knuckle it what's important is one new
thing
from now until forever that consistency
of the habit so we want to make a small
promise we're already going to be
uncomfortable i talk about this a lot
too a concept that i call resistance
because every time we set an intention
to change even if logically you can have
as many of us do a court case for why i
really need to stick to this change this
time
right when i go to either the first time
i go to do the new thing or maybe it's
the fifth time that i'm trying to now
maintain my habit it's only a matter of
time before one of two things happen we
either get mental resistance in our mind
and our thoughts that could look like
the endless to-do list of other things
that we should be doing or maybe the
million reasons why this won't work this
time
or some of it drops into our bodies
where we just start to feel agitated or
just different than we normally feel
and before long
one of those two reasons can convince us
back into that familiar rut before long
i go back to being as i normally
am so the way we want to create and
maintain change is acknowledge that
discomfort is part of changing it's part
of doing something new it's that
unfamiliar space that my subconscious
likes to avoid we can even reframe it
it's signs that i'm moving in a
direction of difference how great so
don't expect it not to be there and then
we learn to work with it we integrate it
in a sense by making one small promise
and we focus on keeping it
so i love the mention of reframing talk
to me about how big of a piece of your
practice was that do you encourage
people to do that do you see big changes
from it
i think reframing can be incredibly
important you know thinking about it
just when i first learned about cbt
that's what it's based on this idea that
if i can begin to think differently if i
reframe my thought i can access a new
feeling a new behavior a new choice on
the end of that feeling
i still use principles of that we become
very locked in the one way we think
about things so the more we can expand
in any area i i talk about expanding a
lot creating space allowing maybe i have
my go-to my default thought but maybe i
can begin to reframe that and make space
for two thoughts three thoughts can you
give me give me an example especially as
we think about childhood defining so
much of our presence
can't go back and undo it but you can
reframe it
what's an example of using that so i
talk about reframing in childhood a lot
as we become aware of our patterns a lot
of times we'll hear make statements of
blame
right you did this to me um a great
reframe in that moment understanding
that we were all raised by caregivers
that are limited to the extent of what
they know how they themselves live what
they themselves were modeled so i think
that can be an incredibly helpful
reframe that things weren't done
necessarily to me or because of me in
childhood
i lived the effects or the results of
the very real limitations that my
caregivers had based on their own past
experience
and so the words you just said are what
you would tell yourself as you begin to
get pissed off or whatever about
something that happened it's like hey
whoa whoa mom dad
lover whatever like hey they've been
through a lot and by thinking about that
now you're seeing something different is
that the idea and just to be clear
you're making space for something in
addition you don't have to negate
because some of us do this and i
actually became a pro at this
i would explain away my experience i
would become so forgiving because they
were limited that i wouldn't leave
spades for my initial so when i say
expand for an additional experience you
can absolutely keep the space for your
anger your hurt your disappointment
and maybe make space for compassion or
empathy or forgiveness something else we
don't have to just switch it and i again
i speak this from my own lived
experience of becoming really good at
explaining away all of my experience
based on the very real limitations that
i perceived in others so it becomes my
favorite word and i can feel this
and
and and and
how do you make sure the ans are
productive
exploring i mean we can become part of
the journey of this is getting really
curious because for some of us an and
could be really productive whatever that
reframe is and for another that and
could lead down an unproductive road so
we have to determine for ourselves
that's why i talk about becoming a
self-healer really just becoming
intimately
knowledgeable about yourself so that
means exploring witnessing am i the
person who this reframe can create
helpful space can help me make room for
a new feeling a new behavior a new
choice
or is this and a limitation in my life
in a different way
how do you help people wrap their heads
around like
hey i'm really upset about this thing
and that's useful or hey i'm really
upset about this thing and this this is
a pattern we have to interrupt
i think sometimes it's exploring
exploring the outcomes exploring a lot
of times it's getting clear on
what kind of utility or usefulness are
we looking for and what do i mean when i
say this
a lot of us when we're looking to create
change we actually want the people
around us to be the ones changing
so it's kind of the radical you know
kind of self-responsibility ownership um
the conversation i always have around
boundaries boundaries aren't ultimatums
they're not me pointing some finger at
you tom and giving you you know if you
do this this will happen if you don't do
this this will happen
boundaries are for self-empowerment so i
answer and i think about things in the
same context right
what am i looking what pattern am i
owning here um what role am i playing
and how can i create change whether or
not you're being an active agent or an
active player as well and sometimes this
means being radically honest with
ourselves and exploring what our
intentions are what our behaviors are
and how we're participating in the
pattern
even in the moments where we're pretty
much convinced it's not us
so i think a lot of times it's that deep
level of self-exploration
that can give us clarity on that
what are the tools you give people
there's a lot of prompts in your book
and again called how to do the work it's
a really pretty extraordinary
handhold for people where you walk them
through you give them tools that they
can use on a daily basis
which i was very impressed by how do you
get them to
like we'll take the hard example of
they're convinced they're right and yet
they're stuck in a rut they're not
making the progress they want you
recommend that they use like some real
radical self-honesty
what's that process look like are they
journaling are they telling a friend are
they seeking feedback like what what is
the the step
any and all of those things could be
helpful um journaling you know for some
of us helps us get
get the information out there it can
help us look at it a bit more
objectively once we've written something
and we can review it later i'm saying
objectively that can be information that
is offered to us when we seek support or
when someone views upon us or our
patterns
this looks like oftentimes my partner in
the very beginning of healing where you
know her being separate from me she
could offer
observations on habits and patterns and
how they were affecting me if i'm
perfectly honest i did not want to hear
that at first i became very defensive um
she was definitely wrong and for sure
not being supportive of myself um so
it's very hard to learn how to i think
take those objective vantage points
objective perspectives in um i also
believe we can become an objective
observer of ourself um we can learn how
to see
um how it is that we're participating
like i said in real time can you tell me
how
yeah absolutely when we as we fire up
that conscious part of our mind
we are
we can be viewing ourself in real time
we can hear and see the patterns in our
subconscious we're narrating life the
large majority of our day all day
as we drop in and begin to hear and see
those narratives they are very
repetitive they are usually around the
same stories do you have a north star
for people so if my north star for
people is you have a goal you're either
moving towards it or you're not
do you have a north star around you feel
safe in your body or anything like that
that people can use to navigate i think
a great yeah safety in our body how does
it feel i often think about
expansion feeling open and receptive and
feeling tight and closed and constricted
for me those are my markers of my
nervous system when i'm feeling open and
expansive and receiving of the world i
know that i'm feeling safe
i know that i'm in a creative space i'm
in a space to connect with other people
when i'm feeling tight i even can
reflect it sometimes i can catch it in
my musculature explain that i don't
understand i can catch tension i can
catch when i'm holding my shoulders up
when i'm crunching myself when i'm
feeling more constricted
that's a marker that i go back too often
because i've learned that maps on to my
nervous system and when i'm feeling safe
versus when i'm feeling not safe so
that's language that can be helpful for
people do i feel light do i feel like
i've left someone and i want to go see
that person again i'm thinking about
them positively or when i've left this
lunch engagement do i hope that you've
lost my number and i never hear from you
again i mean that can be interpersonal
markers right am i always dodging um
this type of experience or this type of
event or am i always dodging this type
of person or this relationship
we can begin to see our own cues our own
markers like i said for me i go back to
constriction and expansion or feeling
receptive and that's how i know if i'm
safe or not
do you work with people at all on
identifying what their sort of
either attachment style or attack
patterns i'm not sure what language you
would use around that but you gave a
great example of you and lolly how
when she's like coming at you then
you're closing down which makes her come
more or vice versa i can't remember the
exact dynamic but it was literally polar
opposites and i thought man this is a
recipe for disaster and how you began to
unwind that i think is really
interesting
so a lot of people listening might have
heard you know attachment styles am i
anxious and my avoidance
i think similarly in those terms
i think globally or i know globally that
we are impacted by those earliest models
of relationships meaning the roles that
we played the dynamics that we got
here's that word again familiar with
right earliest in life that we maybe
started repeating once we were toddler
age and had peers right we become the
helper at home and now we're the helper
in our friend group or we're the the yes
person always saying yes or the
caretaker we tend to be really
repetitive in how we relate
and i'm of the belief that those
earliest patterns again are just
repeated in time so whether you do
reading on attachment styles and you
know that you're anxious or anxious
avoidant or you just observe your
dynamics and relationships the takeaway
is always
that which i did in childhood that which
was familiar how do i feel bonded to
people how do i feel safe with people or
not safe with people become those
patterns that i repeat over time
awareness is key here becoming aware
what are my relational patterns
how close do i feel to people are there
emotions i bring into my relationships
or do i keep this type of emotion out or
all type of emotions out again do i tend
to play one particular role is there
always a need or maybe all of my needs
that go unmet in my relationships or do
i feel comfortable expressing myself
when i have a need etc
and again i believe that we're very
patterned all that lives in our
subconscious so becoming aware and
conscious allows us to over time begin
to break some of those habits and
patterns that don't serve me beginning
to put up a boundary beginning to say no
beginning to express my need when i have
it
that all makes sense so
the subtitle of your book which we
talked about at the beginning um i think
we've covered two parts of that so we've
got the finding our patterns
we've got the healing from the past now
i want to talk about something that i
found really interesting which is
creating your
space self
which i was very intrigued by that it
wasn't creating yourself it was creating
your self
what did you mean by that how do we
create he didn't say discover he said
create so how do we create ourself
yeah and this this is interesting
because for me this really turned a
belief that i had internalized
for quite some time on its head and for
a very long time i think like a lot of
us i didn't believe that there was much
creation that was possible i thought
that you know whatever genetics we were
born with whatever circumstances we were
born into pretty much that would unfold
and that would become our path in life
with many things outside of our control
um this was you know evidenced in the
field for a very long time when we used
to believe in genetic determinism that
idea that whatever it was we were given
that we don't really change we don't
grow we don't evolve our genes are our
destiny and now we understand
differently we actually know that we
operate
with our choices meaning what i have
genes right that load the gun and then
the things i'm doing each and every day
determine how i am in life i even
believe that things such as personality
these patterned ways of being this is
exactly what you and i have been talking
about we could call that our genetic
personality or we could really look at
that as a conditioned way of being so
when i began to realize that wait a
minute things aren't as set in stone i
began to entertain many new
conversations with myself of possibility
of change and i now believe that we
actually can create ourselves we can
create our future by beginning to make
new choices now
okay so how do we set the course for
that i know you talk about basically
future self journaling walk people
through that process
so future self journaling is actually as
someone who never really journaled i
never really had a journaling practice
growing up however i was diving into the
research on neuroplasticity and our
incredible brains power to you know
imagine futures and create change just
through imagination alone and i created
a model a new way to journal
based on changing or working toward a
future that's different and i called it
future soft journaling and i used it
myself right from the very beginning of
my healing journey
i found it really helpful
first and foremost to help counter that
autopilot i found that for me every day
i do my journaling in the morning though
you could do it throughout your day at
any time
the act of sitting down and setting an
intention to that day can begin or to
continue to do one new thing differently
that for me that was the make it or
break it between even just remembering
that oh wait i'm wanting to do something
new
because i just like everyone else can
wake up tomorrow and slide right into my
autopilot and go right into those habits
and patterns so for me it was that
intentional that conscious mind
where i reminded myself that i'm wait
i'm actually working toward creating
again one
small daily promise i also harnessed
then
our crea our brains incredible ability
to harness imagination
writing in the present tense as if those
changes had already been in fact the
case so my earliest journaling was
around i'm sure this is probably of no
surprise to listeners becoming conscious
so every day i would journal how my
intention was to be a conscious being to
be present in the given moment and i
wrote it as if it was the case i am a
present a present being i am conscious i
use my breath to become attentive to the
moment at hand or whatever it is i would
write
as i'm writing that and as i'm
quote-unquote saying that essentially to
my my mind my brain
it in that moment doesn't know that's
not in reality already happened that i'm
not already that conscious being
according to my mind in that moment it's
as if it's true all of those neurons are
firing as if it's true all of that
release of you know the emotions as if
it's true so now i'm harnessing practice
rehearsal mental rehearsal so the more
consistently i harness that intention to
change each and every day i became
conscious about what i wanted to do
different and then i began rehearsing it
as i was writing it in my journal
before long i was able to build the
third step in the practice
go out and practice remember then
throughout my day
to tune in to my conscious moment and
through utilizing that daily practice of
journaling not only did i create a new
habit of being conscious
i was able to build on that habit and
create an incredible amount of change so
i have since released those the the
template the journal prompt so anyone
who's interested can grab those on my
website
and can get started creating some change
toward their future self
thinking about the future self and
constructing that in a very intentional
way i think is one of the most important
things that any human being can do i
love that you've got such a focus on
that
how many areas does that apply to is
that all for self-healing do you have
people use it for career advancement
like what
what are the limitations of future self
journaling there are no limitations as
far as i see it so you can repurpose
reuse i still use the same template um i
change the pattern or what i'm working
on each and every day
you know whether or not we want to use
it i have a lot of people who use it
ourself creates our world so whether or
not we're talking our business self
our relational self how we feel about
ourself and how we relate to ourself
internally maps on to how do i relate in
my relationships how am i a leader
how i express in the world is affected
by the relationship i have with myself
by how i'm tending to my own needs or
not tending to my own needs by how
comfortable i am expressing myself to
myself let alone to the world so very
early on in my field i found and i
started to get people from business i'm
coming in with a business problem
really we're coming in with a self a
relationship with self issue a limiting
belief
a lack of worthiness um scarcity around
money etc so i think most roads leave
lead back to self
so future self journaling and working on
this self can help
facilitate its expression whether it's
in our business world in our personal
world
or really anywhere creative world a lot
of us are blocked creatively because of
our relationship with ourself
that's interesting so what is the number
one way that you find people are
creatively blocked based on themselves
is it a lack of self-worth a lack of
their belief in
they're creating something of value like
is is there anything universal there or
is it you know just like as many reasons
as there could be
yes and i think the most foundational
reason we're blocked creatively is
because we can't access creativity if we
want to go back to abraham maslow some
of us might have heard of him in his
hierarchy of human needs i'm going to
really simplify this at the bottom are
our physical needs having a body that's
physiologically
it again really simplifying it this is
my maslowian pyramid we have our
emotional needs having the ability to
tolerate stress to fall out of
regulation and to come back and at that
tip where he calls self-actualization
i believe that's the center of our
spiritual needs our heart space that's
where creativity lies we have to be in
flow we have to be so fully present to
what's happening to be even safely
present to what's happening being able
to fully receive the whole moment to
even be able to access that part of our
brain so i believe that so many of us
are dysregulated at those foundational
layers that we can't actually access
creativity some of us can't access joy
or ease or playfulness this someone was
me again back to me i was so
dysregulated you would have never heard
me refer to myself as a creative being
or a creator i mean i now regularly
refer to myself that's what i do for my
job i'm a teacher i'm a creator i would
have never spoken those words having a
joyful laugh having playful moments that
didn't factor into my daily life and for
me it was because i was i wasn't safe
enough in my body so that's a big big
reason and i bring that up here yes as
we become safe and as we become
regulated a lot of us then have deeper
levels of lack of self-worth
where it translates to the inability or
the fear of putting our art or our
creation or our essence out there but a
large majority of us tom are
dysregulated at this core level that we
can't even safely enter a creative mind
because i've heard you talk a lot i
know the depths of which you're speaking
to the dysregulation i'd like to drill
into it so
as a
guy building a mindset company
i
didn't
want necessarily to talk about health
but i do a whole show around health
because i fully understand that without
getting your body
regulated to use your words just just
your body like you're eating right
you're exercising you're sleeping you're
doing some sort of i would say
meditation but you know
breath work focus work
being attentive to the moment if you're
not doing that stuff
the number of things that break down is
is really quite terrifying so for
instance like you i went through
crippling anxiety and i don't know how
badgers was but mine was truly crippling
and
i didn't understand that probably 60
percent of it was my diet
and it was crazy as i got my anxiety
under control and was doing all the
mental things that i thought would get
me to 100 and it didn't
and then really started looking at diet
and microbiome and what an impact that
has on triggering my anxiety that was
pretty eye opening
what advice do you have for people that
are dysregulated at forget childhood
trauma just like at a physiological
level
my similarly to your story
tom my the foundation of my nutritional
balance my sleep
sleep is a big critical area that many
of us aren't getting enough of or lying
to ourselves about how much we're
getting and or if we're getting it we're
not sleeping well
so for me it was building those you know
physiological
changes shifts in my lifestyle that was
a game changer for me
the types of food i was eating i had a
lot of inflammation that was causing my
brain fog
and and again i think this is the case
going back in time to my clients
of those
moments of disempowerment
only so much insight this is why again i
talk about the need for a holistic model
of wellness cbt for a very long time was
our gold standard if we're in a
dysregulated body only so much changing
or reframing our thinking can go so far
so this was the big group of people that
i was included in and my heart was going
out to and i was feeling disempowered
right alongside because no no amount of
cognitive shifts could affect the
dysregulated body so our nutrition
getting really conscious about what
we're putting in our body how it's
making us feel do we eat when we're
hungry or do we for the many million
reasons why many of us eat otherwise
outside of being hungry do we even know
how it feels to be hungry for some of us
just getting really conscious in our
body through trial and error determining
what makes my body feel the best and
then consciously
and i make conscious choices all the
time around food for me this is a
reframe i can offer that can be helpful
it's not about restricting when i decide
you know not to eat the gluten for this
meal
it's about knowing the choice right and
the outcomes of that choice knowing that
if i eat gluten this time and sometimes
i do eat gluten i love pizza and every
now and again i want a gluten-filled
pizza and i will eat that consciously
knowing what the fallout will be
i know myself enough and i'm embodied
enough so for many of us it's just
getting in our body determining what
food makes me feel like i can perform i
have my brain that's sharp and i feel
rested sometimes it's sleep getting
honest around our sleep
yeah everything is trade-offs especially
when you're talking about food there are
many a delicious thing that i will
indulge in very rarely but i will
indulge in because it has this
extraordinary brain chemistry reaction
but i know
i'm either i'm not going to sleep as
well or i might have an upset stomach or
you know just even putting on
undesirable body fat um
but recognizing like you said that this
is a lifestyle choice not about
restriction it's just about i know what
the trade-offs are sure i i can have it
i'm only hurting myself so if the
pleasure in that moment outweighs
what i know is coming as a result then
you know by all means
and so it is interesting like one thing
i've seen people really struggle with
i'm so curious to know if you if i've
got to imagine you've come across this i
deserve to be able to eat this ice cream
smoke this cigarette um
you know whatever whatever that's
getting them into trouble and i'm just
like
i get i actually get the emotion it does
seem unfair like for instance if my wife
and i who's half my size
if we eat the same calories
i will put on fat and she'll just get
sweaty at night it's crazy
so
that's really unfair to me i'm like wait
a minute what what did i do to deserve
these poor genetics and what did you do
you know do and i'm happy for you but it
also seems unfair
so
but recognizing that that mentality does
not change it like how do you help
people out of something so gnarly that
has a real
reason to be upset about
yeah it's incredibly difficult and the
end i think can imply here you know
honoring
the upset honoring the part of you that
does feel like you got the short end of
the stick or that it is unfair that is
still wearing the consequences of our
past and making space
for you know whatever it is that we want
to see happen differently or whatever it
is that we imagine would would shift or
change in our life if things were to be
different that and can go a long way and
i say that because i think for a very
long time forever in the beginning it's
very hard for those of us who've been
practicing
that
short end of the stick dialogue that
it's not fair um just like all things we
can't vanish that overnight
so for some of us it's just noticing
when it's there
and
unhooking the attention not expecting
your subconscious to just realize that
oh that's not helpful anymore okay tom
i'll just leave you alone then no
worries
absolutely not your subconscious is
going to probably offer you
it's not fair narrative in every
situation that you would otherwise have
thought it's not fair so don't
anticipate that it's going to go away
what we have control over though is
spending less time thinking it so the
first time you hear your your mental you
know rehearsal of it's not fair instead
of just doing whatever it is you
typically do going down the you know the
the circle of the drain of it's not fair
until all the things that aren't fair we
all have the thing we do with the first
thought once it becomes that first
thought spending less time so that
allows us to then expand to make space
for something new but i share that first
part because i think some of us do
magically expect it to vanish we get
upset when it doesn't um and then when
it doesn't we then spend too much time
so we can empower ourselves by
acknowledging that it's there and then
by removing our attention and building
our muscle and refocusing it maybe here
is where you offer yourself the reframe
that you prefer to practice in that
moment
which you're not going to believe let me
add and on that
do not expect to believe the new thought
in that moment don't expect to go from
it's not fair it's totally fair of
course you're not gonna
do that 180
though you can begin to practice
something new
i love that go
deeper so
i
from experience know that a lot of times
you're not going to believe what you're
telling yourself at first but over time
just the sheer repetition it becomes
familiar it feels safe to use your
language and so you start going
oh yeah this really is wait a second no
this isn't true but you've repeated it
so many times it actually you you do
come to believe it um
how do you help people through that
process do you just say have faith trust
me repeat it enough or do you have a
different insight on that
so the more you practice it i want to
first share why because i go into this
in the book we actually have part of our
our mind our brain it's called the
reticular activating system so like you
mentioned earlier we're very grateful
for this little part of our brain
because like you mentioned earlier we
can't take it all in at once we can't
think every thought at once we can't
attend every stimuli in this in this
exact moment at once we would completely
overwhelm our system so we have a little
part of our mind that determines what's
relevant for us
and it filters out anything else that's
not relevant the common example is when
you decide you're going to buy a new
particular type of car right so now
you've you've practiced thinking about
this car you're researching it you're
going all these car lots and now all you
see is everyone driving that same car
cars didn't just appear on the road you
just started to pay attention because
now that car is relevant to you same
thing happens with all of our beliefs
beliefs originated simply as a thought
that we practiced over time that then
got validated by our experience because
typically our thought arose from some
experience that happened and then any
similar experience connects to those
same thoughts and then we become really
practiced and then our reticular
activating system comes on the scene and
sets us up to confirm our belief our
thought because i've practiced it long
enough so any opposing evidence in that
moment so say i'm not worthy is my
common thought it's for many of us
any evidence in this moment of my
worthiness will be deleted and all i'll
see is that side look
or that call that went unanswered all
i'll see is evidence for how unworthy i
am
and we're doing this unbeknownst to
ourselves day in and day out so to
create a new belief like i said first we
want to spend less time with our old
beliefs entertaining them engaging with
them while we don't anticipate that
they're going to leave right away
we can refocus our attention
the more we rehearse than new beliefs
we're actually priming that reticular
activating system
so now we become a little more expansive
and i can let a little more new
information in from my environment so
before long when i start to actually see
confirmation of this new belief in real
time
that's when i began to shift i don't
think anything is a greater teacher
personally tom than wisdom living the
experience of change so i can sit here
on podcast after podcast and tell
everyone all of the beliefs i've changed
about myself
i urge everyone out there to create
change for themselves and you do it by
practicing a new thought
by over time allowing in a little more
confirmatory evidence of that new
thought and then before you know it you
do start to see more and more evidence
and now you've lived the experience of
changing a belief
all right let's get in the weeds about
self-worth i think this this is a
fascinating one and
my sort of short punch line to
self-worth is for you to have self-worth
you have to do something you think is
worthy
and that there is
an element of what you're talking about
you're going to rehearse that thought
you're going to open yourself up for
some more confirming evidence
but if you're not doing things that you
actually value it's going to be really
hard to
develop that sense of self-worth your
idea of little promises i think is is a
brilliant step in that i said i was
gonna do it and i did it that's
confirming evidence of self-worth do you
have something else that you um give to
people to use as they develop that
i think self-worth originates when we
take care of self it can be as simple as
caring for the self's physical body for
some of us the habits and patterns we
learned aren't self honoring aren't self
aware aren't tailored to me and my
body's physical experience so for a lot
of us we begin to rebuild our self-worth
when we first and foremost keep those
small promises
reversing that pattern of self-betrayal
which is just i've made a lot of
promises that i haven't kept so now that
i begin to make promises that i'm
keeping i'm showing myself that
alignment and for a lot of us it does
originate around just general day in and
day out i call it re-parenting behaviors
self-care how am i tending to my
physical body can i become worth it to
be someone who cares for their physical
needs how about emotionally the harder
harder still right going down another
layer can i be someone who cares for my
own emotional needs right when i'm
zapped when i don't have resources about
me can i tend to that or do i continue
to power through and show up in the
world for everyone else can i be worth
it in those small ways and as i develop
confidence and as i empower myself by
keeping promises in those areas
now i can start to create right a new
experience another snowball rolling down
where now i can begin to set intentions
right of action of creating of living my
purpose in the world of doing things
that are maybe a bit more externally
worthy and i think the sense that you're
asking i believe though to simplify the
answer it begins in small daily things
many of us are confirming a narrative of
unworthiness because we're not showing
up for ourselves in the smallest of ways
no question
can you define re-parenting that that is
an element of the book that i found
really interesting
so re-parenting is is the daily habits
and patterns that typically center
around are three areas of need so what
re-parenting is typically it's in
adulthood a process that each of us you
know undertake very individualized
based on developing new habits in the
areas where we could better modify some
of those older habits and patterns and
better meet our unique needs as an adult
one thing i find interesting about the
concept and tell me if this is
intentional and why you named it that is
so when you think about parenting it
automatically conjures images of the
parent and the child
and when i think about the
mind and the relationship that we have
with our sort of
conscious behaviors and our subconscious
behaviors the conscious behavior becomes
the new parent who's doing your future
self journaling they're setting
intention they've developed awareness
and now they're essentially
communicating through what i think you
would call practicing the behavior to
the subconscious that's
acting ways that are not beneficial
doing things that you know you would
want to gently guide a child away from
was that intentional in calling it
re-parenting
yes um i actually call it the wise
inter-parent inner parent which we all
want to cultivate and what inner child
work is is really honoring that we do
all have that at space in our
subconscious that contains those habits
those patterns a lot of times it
contains those more immature coping
mechanisms where quite literally i
scream and yell when i'm upset or i
storm off and i take my toys and i don't
want to talk to you anymore i do a
little bit of both um a lot of times we
see that around our emotional reaction
so it's honoring that we all have that
inner child-like space within us again
it's stored in our subconscious so our
goal is that expansion same thing
creating that consciousness where i can
see
those unexpressed needs those old habits
those old patterns i can witness them
compassionately right developing that
wise inner parent just like a guide like
you're saying
man as a
metaphor that one is so beautiful that
one really hits home for me in terms of
as somebody's going through the process
when they're doing the work that you're
talking about for them to
have
one a metaphor that
when done well conjures images of warmth
and nurturing and caretaking and
patience and love and bringing all of
those things to this process
which can be a very long process of
constantly coming back to ground zero
and there can be a lot of frustration
around that
you know and and just
walking yourself through it the way that
you would show patience to a child that
you love it that really landed for me i
like that a lot
and of course it's it's for many most of
us i should say much more difficult in
practice um a lot of us do so much more
quickly extend compassion i've noticed
and i noticed this to myself to others
um more quickly than we do so to
ourselves so i just wanna you know end
by honoring the fact that it is a
process and a lot of times the first
step of it is acknowledging all of the
ways and areas where we're not
compassionate with ourself and then
obviously beginning to break some of
those habits spending a little less time
in that critical voice so that over time
we can make space for the much more
compassionate experience that you're
beautifully describing
well my friend tell people where they
can find you because you have become a
true sort of wise inner parent to so
many people and what you're putting out
there is so extraordinarily useful
where can people connect
so each and every day i'm on the
instagram account that started it all at
the dot holistic dot psychologist and on
there i'm sharing daily tools and
healing sharing aspects of my journey
and i always love to shout out the
amazing community of self-healers
that exists and that is always engaging
with the work on that page and i say
that as someone who a big motivator for
myself in the journey and the online
aspect of it was looking for that
community of people
knowing that healing can be incredibly
lonely so there's a youtube page as well
that's currently getting revamped at the
dot or the holistic psychologist that
anyone can check out so in the next
month or two that'll be unrolled with a
new look
for the daily or the weekly teaching
videos
nice
well guys trust me this is a book you're
going to want to read how to do the work
by the extraordinary nicole lapera so
make sure that you guys check it out
it's
really a phenomenal read and speaking of
things that are phenomenal if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
so even in the darkest moments of
despair getting sober at 25 it was that
faith that led me into the next right
action uh remembering trauma in 2016 it
was the faith that got me out of bed in
the morning and out of that desperation